Add Earth Observation guide to tutorials (#1522)
CSCfi/csc-user-guide: docs/support/tutorials/gis/eo_guide.md

At CSC, [some Finnish EO datasets](#eo-data-at-csc) are available for direct use. In many cases, however, downloading EO data from other services (see [list of EO data download services](#eo-data-download-services)) is a required step of the process. Puhti and cPouta provide local storage of ~1-20 Tb. For more storage space,  [Allas object storage](../../../data/Allas/index.md) can be used.

Using CSC computing services requires basic Linux skills and ability to use some scripting language or command-line tools. In addition, supercomputers and virtual machines require you to understand some specific concepts, so it takes a few hours to get started. The new Puhti web interface makes the start considerably easier, providing a desktop environment in the web browser, which enables the use of tools with Graphical User Interfaces (GUI) and also tools like R Studio and JupyterLab for an easy start with R, Python and Julia.

## What data do I need?

What to consider when chosing data:

> * Sensor

Reviewer: * Sensor
!! Depending on the wavelengths observed, clouds, ground conditions and atmospheric artifacts may result in data gaps
> Optical 
....

    * Optical
    * Multispectal
    * Hyperspectral
    * RADAR (Radio Detection and Ranging), SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar)
    * LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging)
* Resolution

>     * Temporal: when and how often a certain area is visited

Reviewer: * Temporal: revisit period of a satellite over the area, e.g. length of time it takes for a satellite to complete one entire orbit cycle and take a new image over area of interest
    * Spatial: Pixel size. A measure of the smallest object that can be detected by the sensor
    * Spectral: the area of the electromagnetic spectrum that is observed and spectral width of each band provided
    * Radiometric: Bit-depth, the number of bits representing the energy recorded

    * Spatial: the area on the ground that each pixel covers
    * Spectral: the area of the electromagnetic spectrum that is observed and spectral width of each band provided

>         * Depending on the wavelengths observed,  clouds and atmospheric artifacts may result in data gaps

Reviewer: Move this under 'Sensor', since it applies also to RADAR: _* Depending on the wavelengths observed, clouds, ground conditions and atmospheric artifacts may result in data gaps_

    * Radiometric: how many values are possible for each pixel (bit-depth)
* Costs:
    * Some EO data is freely available as open data
    * Some commercial datasets might be possible to get for free/less for research

> * Preprocessing level

Reviewer: Raw data - requires processing before you can use it for reliable analysis. Always better if you can use already processed datasets.

    * Raw data
    * Analysis ready data 
    * Mosaics
* User experience and knowledge
    * RADAR/LiDAR require solid background knowledge for processing and interpretation

>     * Optical data is more easily interpreted and processed (and more pre-processed data is available)

Reviewer: I might take this last part away - This might be pushing them to use optical even though something else would be better? Also optical data is sometimes way more difficult :D

Author: rephrased

|[Airbus, Spot](https://www.intelligence-airbusds.com/imagery/constellation/spot/)|1.5|-|1986->|No|
|[Planet, several satellites ](https://www.planet.com/products/planet-imagery/)|0.5-5|-|2009-> |No|
|[DigitalGlobe, WorldView](http://worldview3.digitalglobe.com/)|0.3-30|-|1997->|No|
|[Airbus, Pleiades](https://pleiades.cnes.fr/en/PLEIADES/index.htm)|0.3-0.5|-|2012->|No|
||||||
|**Hyperspectral**|||||
|**[NASA, MODIS](https://modis.gsfc.nasa.gov/)**|250-100|1-2|1999->|Yes|
|[NASA, EO-1](https://www.usgs.gov/centers/eros/science/earth-observing-1-eo-1)|10-30|-|2000-2017|Yes|
||||||
|**Radar, SAR**|||||
|**[ESA, Sentinel 1](https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-1)**|5|6|2014->|Yes|
|[ESA, Radarsat](https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/eng/satellites/radarsat/)|1-100|24|1995->|Yes|
|[TanDEM-X](https://www.dlr.de/content/en/missions/tandem-x.html)/[TerraSAR-X](https://www.dlr.de/content/en/missions/terrasar-x.html)|0.25-40|-|2010->|No|
|[ICEYE](https://www.iceye.com/)|0.5-2.5|1|2018->|No|
||||||
|**LiDAR**|Footprint size||||
|[NASA, ICESat2](https://icesat-2.gsfc.nasa.gov/)|13|91|2019->|Yes|

> |[NADA, GEDI](https://gedi.umd.edu/)|25|-|2018->|Yes|

Reviewer: Should we add MML lidar here? Or maybe it was already mentioned elsewhere

Reviewer 2: I my mind I have put the line on satellite data here, so I would not may-be put it here. Put if you put NLS lidar, then NLS orthoimages should also be added.

Author: Jup, I wuold also stick to satellites, Earth Observation as in observing whole earth, in a way. Will add a note in beginning

!!! default "EO database"

    Database of all EO missions and instrument information can be found in the [CEOS EO handbook database](http://database.eohandbook.com/database/instrumenttable.aspx)
    
    
## Where can I find the data?

Commercial datasets are usually available from data provider, while open datasets may be available in different processing stages from different services. Where possible, it might be a good idea to check processing options close to the data, for direct access or faster download. While graphical browse and download services can provide a good overview of the data and are easy to use, the download of huge amounts of data gets considerably easier using a bulk downloader or download API (Application Programming Interface).

!!! default "STAC"

>     Many data providers provide a Spatio Temporal Asset Catalog (STAC) of their datasets. These catalogues help in finding available data based on time and location with the possibility for multiple additional filters, such as cloud cover and resolution. The [STAC Index](https://www.stacindex.org/) provides a nice overview of available catalogues from all over the world. The STAC Index page also includes many resources for learning and utilizing STAC. Check out also CSC's [examples for utilizing STAC from Python](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/blob/master/python/STAC).

Author: ```suggestion
    Many data providers provide a Spatio Temporal Asset Catalog (STAC) of their datasets. These catalogs help in finding available data based on time and location with the possibility for multiple additional filters, such as cloud cover and resolution. The [STAC Index](https://www.stacindex.org/) provides a nice overview of available catalogs from all over the world. The STAC Index page also includes many resources for learning and utilizing STAC. Check out also CSC's [examples for utilizing STAC from Python](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/blob/master/python/STAC).
```

### EO data at CSC

> Some Finnish EO datasets are available locally at CSC. A STAC cataloguefor all spatial data available at CSC is coming in 2023.

Author: ```suggestion
Some Finnish EO datasets are available locally at CSC. A STAC catalog for all spatial data available at CSC is coming in 2023.
```

> * **Sentinel and Landsat mosaics** of Finland in Puhti. Accessing data in Puhti requires CSC user account with a project where Puhti service is enabled. All Puhti users have **read** access these datasets. You do not need to move the files: they can be used directly, unless you need to modify them, which requires you to make your own copy.

Reviewer: Just a typo? All Puhti users have **read** access TO these datasets

* **Sentinel-2 L2A data** of Finland in Allas. These files are public, so anybody can download them, also from own computer or other services.
* [More information and list of all spatial datasets in CSC computing environment](../../../data/datasets/spatial-data-in-csc-computing-env.md)

### EO data download services  

**[SYKE/FMI, Finnish image mosaics](https://www.syke.fi/fi-FI/Tutkimus__kehittaminen/Tutkimus_ja_kehittamishankkeet/Hankkeet/Paikkatietoalusta_PTA)** : Sentinel-1, Sentinel-2 and Landsat mosaics, for several time periods per year. Some of them are available in Puhti, but not all. [FMI provides also a STAC catalog for these mosaics](https://pta.data.lit.fmi.fi/stac/root.json)

> [**European Space Agency's SciHub**](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/home) provides worldwide main products for Sentinel-1, -2 and -3. It requires free registration. Big part of the data is in the "Long term archive" and cannot be downloaded directly, but needs to be requested first. Download is limited to 2 concurrent processes per user.

Reviewer: Is this now old information, was it so that limitation to 2 concurrent processes per user was now lifted?

Author: Currently this is still true. Will update relevant sections of whole guide once the new system is out

[**Orfeo Toolbox (OTB)**](../../../apps/otb.md) - offers a wide variety of applications from ortho-rectification or pansharpening, all the way to classification, SAR processing, and much more. Orfeo Toolbox is available as CLI, GUI and via Python interface.

[**Python**](../../../apps/python.md)

* The [geoconda module](../../../apps/geoconda.md) provides many useful Python packages for raster data processing and analysis, such as `rasterio`, `rasterstats`, `scimage`, `sentinelsat`, `xarray` and tools for working with STAC.
* [Machine learning modules](../../../apps/index.md#data-analytics-and-machine-learning) provide some common machine learning frameworks, also for deep learning..

[**QGIS**](../../../apps/qgis.md) - open source tool with GUI for working with spatial data including limited multispectral image processing capabilities.  GUI with batch processing possibility and Python interface. Used for example for visualization, map algebra and other raster processing. Many plug-ins available, for EO data processing, check out the [QGIS Semi-automatic classification plugin](https://fromgistors.blogspot.com/p/semi-automatic-classification-plugin.html).

> [**R**](../../../apps/r-env-for-gis.md) - Puhti R installation includes a lot of geospatial packages, includeing serveral useful for EO data processing, such as `terra`, `CAST`, `raster` and `spacetime`, also `rstac` for working with STAC catalogues.

Author: ```suggestion
[**R**](../../../apps/r-env-for-gis.md) - Puhti R installation includes a lot of geospatial packages, includeing serveral useful for EO data processing, such as `terra`, `CAST`, `raster` and `spacetime`, also `rstac` for working with STAC catalogs.
```

[**Sen2Cor**](../../../apps/sen2cor.md) - a command-line tool for Sentinel-2 Level 2A product generation and formatting.

[**Sen2mosaic**](../../../apps/sen2cor.md) - a command-line tool to download, preprocess and mosaic Sentinel-2 data.

[**SNAP**](../../../apps/snap.md) - ESA Sentinel Application Platform. Tool for processing of Sentinel data (+ support for other data sources). GUI, CLI (Graph Processing Tool, GPT) and Python interfaces. [SNAP GPT example for Puhti](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/tree/master/snap).

If you need further applications, you can ask CSC to install them for you. 
 
### Machine Learning with EO data

One example of the advanced usage of EO data is for machine learning. If you are interested in the topic, you can find a lot of examples from [CSC machine learning with spatial data course materials]( https://github.com/csc-training/GeoML). For practical guidelines, see also [CSC machine learning guide](../ml-guide.md)

## Alternative processing services

Below is a list of alternative EO processing services that might be useful, when a lot of data is required and downloading it all to CSC might not be feasible. 

> **[Google Earth Engine](https://earthengine.google.com/)** is a processing platform, which requires registration, but is currently free of charge for research users. It can be accessed via browser and has worldwide analysis ready data available (<a href="https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/" aria-label="GEE data catalogue">browse the catalogue</a>). In general, JavaScript is used on the platform, but also  <a href="https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/guides/python_install" aria-label="Python on GEE">Python</a>  and  <a href="https://github.com/r-spatial/rgee" aria-label="R on GEE">R</a> support exists. Check out [GEE's tutorials](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/tutorials). Note that Google Cloud Storage might be needed to export large datasets.

Author: ```suggestion
**[Google Earth Engine](https://earthengine.google.com/)** is a processing platform, which requires registration, but is currently free of charge for research users. It can be accessed via browser and has worldwide analysis ready data available (<a href="https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/" aria-label="GEE data catalog">browse the catalog</a>). In general, JavaScript is used on the platform, but also  <a href="https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/guides/python_install" aria-label="Python on GEE">Python</a>  and  <a href="https://github.com/r-spatial/rgee" aria-label="R on GEE">R</a> support exists. Check out [GEE's tutorials](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/tutorials). Note that Google Cloud Storage might be needed to export large datasets.
```

**[Microsoft planetary computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com)** offers JupyterHub together with Dask Gateway, both CPUs and GPUs are available. It is currently available in preview.

>  **[Data and Information Access Services (DIAS)](https://www.copernicus.eu/en/access-data/dias)** offer cloud based Virtual Machines (VMs), dedicated baremetal servers, containers, operating system and software images. These services are specialized in EO and have user support available. All of them are commercial services. 

Reviewer: Was this also now old information, eg now this is all under one big CREODIAS?

Author: same as above, currently this is still true. Will update relevant sections of whole guide once the new system is out.

# Earth Observation guide

> This guide aims to help researchers to work with Earth Observation (EO) data using CSC's computing resources. The purpose of this guide is to give an overview of available options, so it would be easier to decide if CSC has suitable services for your EO reseach. It also helps you find the right data and tools for raster data based EO tasks. If you are interested in the fundamentals of EO, please check the [resources and further reading section](#resources-and-further-reading).

Author: ```suggestion
This guide aims to help researchers to work with Earth Observation (EO) data using CSC's computing resources. The purpose of this guide is to give an overview of available options, so it would be easier to decide if CSC has suitable services for your EO reseach. It also helps you find the right data and tools for raster data based EO tasks. This guide focuses on spaceborne platforms. However, many tools and concepts also apply to airborne platforms. If you are interested in the fundamentals of EO, please check the [resources and further reading section](#resources-and-further-reading).
```

At CSC, [some Finnish EO datasets](#eo-data-at-csc) are available for direct use. In many cases, however, downloading EO data from other services (see [list of EO data download services](#eo-data-download-services)) is a required step of the process. Puhti and cPouta provide local storage of ~1-20 Tb. For more storage space,  [Allas object storage](../../../data/Allas/index.md) can be used.

Using CSC computing services requires basic Linux skills and ability to use some scripting language or command-line tools. In addition, supercomputers and virtual machines require you to understand some specific concepts, so it takes a few hours to get started. The new Puhti web interface makes the start considerably easier, providing a desktop environment in the web browser, which enables the use of tools with Graphical User Interfaces (GUI) and also tools like R Studio and JupyterLab for an easy start with R, Python and Julia.

## What data do I need?

What to consider when chosing data:

> * Sensor

Author: ```suggestion
* Sensor
    * Note that depending on the wavelengths observed, clouds, ground conditions and atmospheric artifacts may result in data gaps
```

    * Optical
    * Multispectal
    * Hyperspectral
    * RADAR (Radio Detection and Ranging), SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar)

>     * LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging)
    * Note that depending on the wavelengths observed, clouds, ground conditions and atmospheric artifacts may result in data gaps
```

> * Resolution
>     * Temporal: when and how often a certain area is visited
>     * Spatial: the area on the ground that each pixel covers
>     * Spectral: the area of the electromagnetic spectrum that is observed and spectral width of each band provided
>         * Depending on the wavelengths observed,  clouds and atmospheric artifacts may result in data gaps
>     * Radiometric: how many values are possible for each pixel (bit-depth)

Author: ```suggestion
* Resolution
    * Temporal: when and how often a certain area is revisited
    * Spatial: the area on the ground that each pixel covers, determining the size of the smallest possible feature that can be detected
    * Spectral: the area of the electromagnetic spectrum that is observed and spectral width of each band provided
    * Radiometric: number of bits used to represent the energy recorded (bit-depth)
```
I merged Katris suggestions with previous text. Does this look ok?
spatial resolution is not always interchangable with pixel size, but it is a common thing that is interchanged.

* Costs:
    * Some EO data is freely available as open data
    * Some commercial datasets might be possible to get for free/less for research
* Preprocessing level

>     * Raw data

Author: ```suggestion
    * Raw data - can have different levels and often need to be processed before it can be used for reliable analysis
```

>     * Analysis ready data 

Author: ```suggestion
    * Different levels of preprocessed data - make sure you are aware of what kind of preprocessing has been performed on your data
    * Analysis ready data (ARD)
```

    * Mosaics

> * User experience and knowledge
>     * RADAR/LiDAR require solid background knowledge for processing and interpretation
>     * Optical data is more easily interpreted and processed (and more pre-processed data is available)

Author: ```suggestion
* User experience and knowledge
    * Appropriate background knowledge required for many tasks
    * ARD is "ready to go", but be aware of what preprocessing has been performed on your data
  
```

### EO data at CSC

Some Finnish EO datasets are available locally at CSC. A STAC catalog for all spatial data available at CSC is coming in 2023.

* **Sentinel and Landsat mosaics** of Finland in Puhti. Accessing data in Puhti requires CSC user account with a project where Puhti service is enabled. All Puhti users have **read** access to these datasets. You do not need to move the files: they can be used directly, unless you need to modify them, which requires you to make your own copy.
* **Sentinel-2 L2A data** of Finland in Allas. These files are public, so anybody can download them, also from own computer or other services.
* [More information and list of all spatial datasets in CSC computing environment](../../../data/datasets/spatial-data-in-csc-computing-env.md)

### EO data download services  

**[SYKE/FMI, Finnish image mosaics](https://www.syke.fi/fi-FI/Tutkimus__kehittaminen/Tutkimus_ja_kehittamishankkeet/Hankkeet/Paikkatietoalusta_PTA)** : Sentinel-1, Sentinel-2 and Landsat mosaics, for several time periods per year. Some of them are available in Puhti, but not all. [FMI provides also a STAC catalog for these mosaics](https://pta.data.lit.fmi.fi/stac/root.json)

> [**European Space Agency's SciHub**](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/home) provides worldwide main products for Sentinel-1, -2 and -3. It requires free registration. Big part of the data is in the "Long term archive" and cannot be downloaded directly, but needs to be requested first. Download is limited to 2 concurrent processes per user.

Author: ```suggestion
[**European Space Agency's SciHub**](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/home) provides worldwide main products for Sentinel-1, -2 and -3. It requires free registration. Big part of the data is in the "Long term archive" and cannot be downloaded directly, but needs to be requested first. Download is limited to 2 concurrent processes per user. Please note that between end of January and July 2023 this system is being updated to become the [Copernicus Space Ecosystem](https://medium.com/sentinel-hub/new-copernicus-data-access-service-to-support-the-ecosystem-for-earth-observation-412f829355a3). 
```

3) **Own computing environment** - PC, local cluster. Data needs to be downloaded and all tools must be installed to this system. On the other hand, it gives more freedom to select the tools and set-up. Usually this does not cause any extra costs, but the computing power is usually rather limited.

CSC services do not fit well in this categorization, as they provide some features from all of these. **CSC computing services provide a lot of computing power and storage space, and they are free of charge** for Finnish researchers for academic or educational use. 

At CSC, EO data can be processed and analyzed using a supercomputer, for example [supercomputer Puhti](../../../computing/systems-puhti.md), or a virtual machine in the [cPouta cloud service](../../../cloud/pouta/pouta-what-is.md). Puhti's computing capacity can hardly be compared to any other EO service, in both available processing power and amount of memory. Both Puhti and cPouta have also GPU resources, which are especially useful for large simulations and deep learning use cases. 

> Puhti has also a lot of [pre-installed applications](#what-applications-are-available-on-puhti), so it is an environment ready to use. cPouta virtual machines are similar to commercial clouds, where all set-up and installations are done by the end-user. In general, both services only support Linux software.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Puhti has also a lot of [pre-installed applications](#what-applications-are-available-on-puhti), so it is an environment ready to use. cPouta virtual machines are similar to commercial cloud services, where all set-up and installations are done by the end-user. In general, both services only support Linux software.
```

> At CSC, [some Finnish datasets](#eo-data-at-csc) are available for direct use. In many cases, however, downloading EO data from other services (see [list of EO data download services](#eo-data-download-services)) is a required step of the process. Puhti and cPouta provide local storage of ~1-20 Tb. For more space,  [Allas object storage](../../../data/Allas/index.md) can be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At CSC, [some Finnish EO datasets](#eo-data-at-csc) are available for direct use. In many cases, however, downloading EO data from other services (see [list of EO data download services](#eo-data-download-services)) is a required step of the process. Puhti and cPouta provide local storage of ~1-20 Tb. For more space,  [Allas object storage](../../../data/Allas/index.md) can be used.
```

    
  

## Where can I find the data?

Commercial datasets are usually available from data provider, while open datasets may be available in different processing stages from different services. Where possible, it might be a good idea to check processing options close to the data, for direct access or faster download. While graphical browse and download services can provide a good overview of the data and are easy to use, the download of huge amounts of data gets considerably easier using a bulk downloader or download API (Application Programming Interface).

!!! default "STAC"

    Many data providers provide a Spatio Temporal Asset Catalog (STAC) of their datasets. These catalogues help in finding available data based on time and location with the possibility for multiple additional filters, such as cloud cover and resolution. The [STAC Index](https://www.stacindex.org/) provides a nice overview of available catalogues from all over the world. The STAC Index page also includes many resources for learning and utilizing STAC. Check out also CSC's [examples for utilizing STAC from Python](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/blob/master/python/STAC).

### EO data at CSC

> Some Finnish EO datasets are available locally at CSC. A STAC for all spatial data available at CSC is coming in 2023.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some Finnish EO datasets are available locally at CSC. A STAC catalgoue for all spatial data available at CSC is coming in 2023.
```

Author: The C in STAC already stands for catalogue, that is why I removed it from here earlier.

Reviewer 2: I think everybody still talks about STAC catalogues, even if grammatically it is not correct.

> Some Finnish EO datasets are available locally at CSC. A STAC catalgoue for all spatial data available at CSC is coming in 2023.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some Finnish EO datasets are available locally at CSC. A STAC cataloguefor all spatial data available at CSC is coming in 2023.
```

### What to consider when choosing a software?

* Functionality
* Interaction type:
    * Graphical User Interface (GUI)
    * Command Line Interface (CLI)
    * Scripting
* Technical aspects:
    * Reproducibility
    * Supported operating systems
    * Automation possibility
    * Combination possibility
    * Computational efficiency
    * Support for parallel computing or batch processing
* Open source vs proprietary
    * Proprietary tools need licenses which may be expensive and/or limiting the use of the tool
    * FOSS (free and open source software) allows the user to inspect the source code and provide high level insights in its functionality

### What applications are available on Puhti?

[**FORCE**](../../../apps/force.md) - Framework for Operational Radiometric Correction for Environmental monitoring. All-in-one processing engine with CLI for EO image archives. [FORCE example for Puhti](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/tree/master/force)

> [**GDAL (OGR)**](../../../apps/gdal.md) - Geospatial Data Abstraction Library.  Collection of command-line tools for accessing and transforming geospatial data, relatively fast and require little computational resources. GDAL support reading data directly from Internet or object storage. GDAL is included in many other tools for data reading and writing. [GDAL example for Puhti](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/tree/master/gdal)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[**GDAL (OGR)**](../../../apps/gdal.md) - Geospatial Data Abstraction Library.  Collection of command-line tools for accessing and transforming geospatial data. It is relatively fast and requires little computational resources. GDAL supports reading data directly from Internet or object storage. GDAL is included in many other tools for data reading and writing. [GDAL example for Puhti](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/tree/master/gdal)
```

# Earth Observation guide

This guide aims to help users to work with Earth Observation (EO) data using CSC's computing resources. The purpose of this guide is to help you find the right data and tools for your raster data based EO tasks. If you are interested in the fundamentals of EO, please check the resources at the bottom of the page.

**What are the benefits of using EO data**

* Possibility to observe wide area at same time
* Non-intrusive
* Same sensor for different parts of the world
* Time series 

> **EO data in raster format**
> 
> * Usually several bands, stored one file per band or several bands in one file (multiband files).
> * Grid of pixel values
> * Example of continuous data
> * Georeference: coordinate for the top left pixel , the size of each pixel in the X direction, the size of each pixel in the Y direction, and the amount (if any) by which the product is rotated.

Author: ```suggestion
!!! default "Raster data format"

    * EO data often several bands, stored one file per band or several bands in one file (multiband files).
    * Grid of pixel values
    * Example of continuous data
    * Georeference: coordinate for the top left pixel , the size of each pixel in the X direction, the size of each pixel in the Y direction, and the amount (if any) by which the product is rotated.
```

* Sensor
    * Optical, Multispectal: [Landsat](https://landsat.gsfc.nasa.gov/), [MODIS](https://modis.gsfc.nasa.gov/), [Copernicus Sentinel-2](https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-2),[Pleiades](https://pleiades.cnes.fr/en/PLEIADES/index.htm), [Spot](https://www.intelligence-airbusds.com/imagery/constellation/spot/), [Planet](https://www.planet.com/products/planet-imagery/), [WorldView](http://worldview3.digitalglobe.com/), [Proba-V](https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/catalog/proba-v-1km-333m-and-100m-products), ...
    * RADAR (Radio Detection and Ranging) -> SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar): [Copernicus Sentinel 1](https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-1), [Radarsat](https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/eng/satellites/radarsat/), [TanDEM-X](https://www.dlr.de/content/en/missions/tandem-x.html), [TerraSAR-X](https://www.dlr.de/content/en/missions/terrasar-x.html), [ICEYE](https://www.iceye.com/),...
    * LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging): [ICESat](https://icesat-2.gsfc.nasa.gov/), [GEDI](https://gedi.umd.edu/), ...
* Resolution
    * Temporal: when and how often a certain area is visited
    * Spatial: the area on the ground that each pixel covers

>     * Spectral: the area of the electromagnetic spectrum that is observed and spectral width of each band provided

Author: ```suggestion
    * Spectral: the area of the electromagnetic spectrum that is observed and spectral width of each band provided
      * Depending on the wavelengths observed,  clouds and atmospheric artifacts  may result in data gaps
```

    * Radiometric: how many values are possible for each pixel (bit-depth)
* Costs
    * Free: e.g. Landsat, MODIS, Sentinel, ...
    * Non free (but might be possible to get for free/less for research): e.g. WorldView, Spot, Planet, ...

> * Preprocessing level
>     * Raw or pre-processed data, e.g. analysis ready data or mosaics

Author: ```suggestion
* Preprocessing level
    * Raw data
    * Corrections applied, e.g. atmospheric and radiometric correction
    * Analysis ready data 
    * Mosaics
    
    * 
```

# Earth Observation guide

> This guide aims to help users who wish to work with Earth Observation (EO) data using CSC's computing resources. The purpose of this guide is to help you find the right data and tools for your raster data based EO tasks. If you are interested in the funamentals of EO, please check the resources at the bottom of the page first.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide aims to help users to work with Earth Observation (EO) data using CSC's computing resources. The purpose of this guide is to help you find the right data and tools for your raster data based EO tasks. If you are interested in the fundamentals of EO, please check the resources at the bottom of the page.
```

**What are the benefits of using EO data**

* Possibility to observe wide area at same time
* Non-intrusive
* Same sensor for different parts of the world
* Time series 

> **EO data in raster format**

Reviewer 2: I find this still rather strange here. I would rather find some external place where rasters are explained, for most readers should be known already.

Author: moved to box

> * One file per band or multiband files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Usually several bands, stored one file per band or several bands in one file (multiband files).
```

* Grid of pixel values
* Example of continuous data

> * Georeference: coordinate for the top left pixel , the size of each pixel in the X direction, the size of each pixel in the Y direction, and the amount (if any) by which the product is rotated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Georeference: where the data is located, coordinate for the top left pixel , the size of each pixel in the X direction, the size of each pixel in the Y direction, and the amount (if any) by which the product is rotated.
```

## What data do I need?

What to consider when chosing data:

* Sensor

>     * Optical, Multispectal: [Landsat](https://landsat.gsfc.nasa.gov/), [MODIS](https://modis.gsfc.nasa.gov/), [Copernicus Sentinel-2](https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-2),[Pleiades](https://pleiades.cnes.fr/en/PLEIADES/index.htm), [Spot](https://www.intelligence-airbusds.com/imagery/constellation/spot/), [Planet](https://www.planet.com/products/planet-imagery/), [WorldView](http://worldview3.digitalglobe.com/), [Proba-V](https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/catalog/proba-v-1km-333m-and-100m-products), ...

Reviewer 2: Add a something about clouds and optical images?

Author: added below to resolution; unsure where would fit best

    * RADAR (Radio Detection and Ranging) -> SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar): [Copernicus Sentinel 1](https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-1), [Radarsat](https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/eng/satellites/radarsat/), [TanDEM-X](https://www.dlr.de/content/en/missions/tandem-x.html), [TerraSAR-X](https://www.dlr.de/content/en/missions/terrasar-x.html), [ICEYE](https://www.iceye.com/),...
    * LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging): [ICESat](https://icesat-2.gsfc.nasa.gov/), [GEDI](https://gedi.umd.edu/), ...

>     * Database of all current and future EO missions and instrument information can be found in the [CEOS EO handbook database](http://database.eohandbook.com/database/instrumenttable.aspx)

Author: ```suggestion
```

>     * Database of all current and future EO missions and instrument information can be found in the [CEOS EO handbook database](http://database.eohandbook.com/database/instrumenttable.aspx)

Reviewer 2: Move this line to the end (or beginning of this chapter). The search there has other options also than sensor.

* Resolution
    * Temporal: when and how often a certain area is visited
    * Spatial: the area on the ground that each pixel covers
    * Spectral: the area of the electromagnetic spectrum that is observed and spectral width of each band provided
    * Radiometric: how many values are possible for each pixel (bit-depth)
* Costs
    * Free: e.g. Landsat, MODIS, Sentinel, ...
    * Non free (but might be possible to get for free/less for research): e.g. WorldView, Spot, Planet, ...

> * Preprocessing needs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Preprocessing level
```

>     * Raw or pre-processed data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Raw or pre-processed data, mosaics
```

* User experience and knowledge
    * RADAR/LiDAR require solid background knowledge for processing and interpretation
    * Optical data is more easily interpreted and processed (and more pre-processed data is available)

> !!! default "Harmonized products"
> 
>     If you plan to work with Sentinel-2 and Landsat 8, check also the 30 m harmonized Landsat 8 and Sentinel-2 product at [NASA](https://hls.gsfc.nasa.gov/).

Author: ```suggestion
!!! default "EO database"

    Database of all current and future EO missions and instrument information can be found in the [CEOS EO handbook database](http://database.eohandbook.com/database/instrumenttable.aspx)
```

## Where can I find the data?

The best place to get the data depends on your needs: Do you want to download the data into your own processing environment or do you need a processing environment close to the data? 

!!! default "Other geospatial datasets"

    For other geospatial vector and raster datasets, check out our [spatial dataset list on CSC research pages](https://research.csc.fi/open-gis-data#intdata3).

> Below is a (uncomplete) set of services, that provide download and processing capabilities:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Services including EO data and providing processing capabilities
```

**CSC services**

* Puhti
    * [List of all available datasets in Puhti](../../../data/datasets/spatial-data-in-csc-computing-env.md)
    * Sentinel and Landsat mosaics of Finland provided by FMI and SYKE: ```/appl/data/geo/sentinel/s2```
    * Every CSC user has **read** access to data stored on Puhti, no need to move it, unless you need to modify it
* Allas

>     * [List of all available geospatial datasets in Allas](../../../data/datasets/spatial-data-in-csc-computing-env.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * [List of all available geospatial datasets in Allas](../../../data/datasets/spatial-data-in-csc-computing-env.md#spatial-data-in-allas)
```

>     * Sentinel-2 L2A data of Finland, where crops are grown during growing seasons of 2016-present, [usage instructions](https://a3s.fi/sentinel-readme/README.txt)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Sentinel-2 L2A data of Finland, where crops are grown, during growing seasons of 2016-present, [usage instructions](https://a3s.fi/sentinel-readme/README.txt)
```

>     * Data can be directly read from Allas without download for some cases, see eg [GDAL docs](../../../apps/gdal.md) and [Allas Python examples](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/blob/master/python/allas/working_with_allas_from_Python_S3.py)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * [Data from Allas can be directly read with different tools](../../../apps/gdal.md#using-files-directly-from-allas).
```

>     * Data can be directly read from Allas without download for some cases, see eg [GDAL docs](../../../apps/gdal.md) and [Allas Python examples](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/blob/master/python/allas/working_with_allas_from_Python_S3.py)

Reviewer 2: There is also R link on the GDAL page, I would not copy them all here, so therefore removing also Python.

        
    
**Amazon Web Service (AWS)** provides worldwide data from, among others, [Sentinel-2](https://registry.opendata.aws/sentinel-2/) and [Sentinel-1 bucket](https://registry.opendata.aws/sentinel-1/), which is managed by [Sinergise](http://www.sinergise.com/). The download costs are on a "requestor pays" basis. AWS also offers the possibility for virtual machines.

> **Data and Information Access Services (DIAS)** (for example [ONDA](https://www.onda-dias.eu/cms/), [CREODIAS](https://creodias.eu/) or [MUNDI](https://mundiwebservices.com/)) are non-free processing platforms with data access. Data from DIAS objectstorage can also be transferred to Allas.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**[Data and Information Access Services (DIAS)](https://www.copernicus.eu/en/access-data/dias)** are non-free processing platforms with direct data access. The services provide primarily Copernicus data.
```

Author: ESA SciHub and DIAS system is currently changing drastically, so this section needs to be rewritten

Author: I think the mention of the possibility of moving data from object storage to object storage is important. I was so happy to find out about it some time ago. It went nicely with rclone after chat with Kimmo, But maybe this should actually be mentioned somewhere in Allas docs or so; maybe it even is already(?).

Reviewer 2: It would be good to mention that object storage to Allas is possible, but that is not specific to one service, so somewhere general.

# Earth Observation guide

This guide aims to help users to work with Earth Observation (EO) data using CSC's computing resources. The purpose of this guide is to help you find the right data and tools for your raster data based EO tasks. If you are interested in the fundamentals of EO, please check the resources at the bottom of the page.

**What are the benefits of using EO data**

* Possibility to observe wide area at same time
* Non-intrusive
* Same sensor for different parts of the world
* Time series 

> !!! default "Raster data format"

Reviewer 2: I find this raster explanation to be rather weak, so still suggest replacing with a link to longer explanation.

> 

Reviewer 2: Extra row to delete? The text is not in the box.

Author: indentation fixed

> EO data is usually available in [raster format]( 
> https://towardsdatascience.com/the-ultimate-beginners-guide-to-geospatial-raster-data-feb7673f6db0). The most common file formats are [GeoTiff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoTIFF) and [GeoJPEG2000](http://giswiki.org/wiki/GeoJPEG2000).

Author: ```suggestion
Most EO data is available in [raster format]( 
https://towardsdatascience.com/the-ultimate-beginners-guide-to-geospatial-raster-data-feb7673f6db0). The most common file formats are [GeoTiff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoTIFF) and [GeoJPEG2000](http://giswiki.org/wiki/GeoJPEG2000).
```

>     * EO data often several bands, stored one file per band or several bands in one file (multiband files).
>     * Grid of pixel values
>     * Example of continuous data
>     * Georeference: coordinate for the top left pixel , the size of each pixel in the X direction, the size of each pixel in the Y direction, and the amount (if any) by which the product is rotated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * EO data often several bands, stored one file per band or several bands in one file (multiband files).
    * Grid of pixel values
    * Example of continuous data
    * Georeference: coordinate for the top left pixel , the size of each pixel in the X direction, the size of each pixel in the Y direction, and the amount (if any) by which the product is rotated.
```
EO data is usually available in [raster format]( 
https://towardsdatascience.com/the-ultimate-beginners-guide-to-geospatial-raster-data-feb7673f6db0). The most common file formats are [GeoTiff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoTIFF) and [GeoJPEG2000](http://giswiki.org/wiki/GeoJPEG2000).

> !!! default "Raster data format"
> 
> Most EO data is available in <a href="https://towardsdatascience.com/the-ultimate-beginners-guide-to-geospatial-raster-data-feb7673f6db0" aria-label="Towards data science guide to raster data">raster format</a>. The most common file formats are <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoTIFF" aria-label="GeoTiff data format description">GeoTiff</a> and <a href="http://giswiki.org/wiki/GeoJPEG2000" aria-label="GeoJPEG2000 data format description">GeoJPEG2000</a>.

Author: ```suggestion
!!! default "Raster data format"

    Most EO data is available in <a href="https://towardsdatascience.com/the-ultimate-beginners-guide-to-geospatial-raster-data-feb7673f6db0" aria-label="Towards data science guide to raster data">raster format</a>. The most common file formats are <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoTIFF" aria-label="GeoTiff data format description">GeoTiff</a> and <a href="http://giswiki.org/wiki/GeoJPEG2000" aria-label="GeoJPEG2000 data format description">GeoJPEG2000</a>.
```

* Resolution
    * Temporal: when and how often a certain area is visited
    * Spatial: the area on the ground that each pixel covers
    * Spectral: the area of the electromagnetic spectrum that is observed and spectral width of each band provided
        * Depending on the wavelengths observed,  clouds and atmospheric artifacts may result in data gaps
    * Radiometric: how many values are possible for each pixel (bit-depth)
* Costs
    * Free: e.g. Landsat, MODIS, Sentinel, ...
    * Non free (but might be possible to get for free/less for research): e.g. WorldView, Spot, Planet, ...
* Preprocessing level
    * Raw data
    * Analysis ready data 
    * Mosaics
* User experience and knowledge
    * RADAR/LiDAR require solid background knowledge for processing and interpretation
    * Optical data is more easily interpreted and processed (and more pre-processed data is available)

!!! default "EO database"

    Database of all current and future EO missions and instrument information can be found in the [CEOS EO handbook database](http://database.eohandbook.com/database/instrumenttable.aspx)

## Where can I find the data?

> For working with EO data there are two main options:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For working with EO data there are two main options:

```

## Where can I find the data?

> The best place to get the data depends on your needs: Do you want to download the data into your own processing environment or do you need a processing environment close to the data? 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For working with EO data there are two main options:
* Use a service which has EO data readily available and offers data processing and analysis capabilities. Usually these give better user experience and efficiency, but the services might be limited in computing power, available tools or options for adding own data. The commercial systems also might have costs.
* Use your own processing environment (PC, cloud or HPC) and download the data to this system. This requires extra effort for downloading and managing the data, but in other ways might give more freedom.
```

!!! default "Other geospatial datasets"

>     For other geospatial vector and raster datasets, check out our [spatial dataset list on CSC research pages](https://research.csc.fi/open-gis-data#intdata3).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    To find other geospatial datasets, check out [CSC open spatial dataset list](https://research.csc.fi/open-gis-data).
```

### Services providing EO data and processing capabilities

**CSC services**

> 

Reviewer 2: For Finnish researchers CSC computing services provide free of charge HPC and cloud resources, with wide selection of available [EO tools in Puhti HPC](#what-applications-are-available-on-puhti). Locally available are only a few Finnish EO datasets.

> **CSC services**
> 

Author: ```suggestion
**CSC services**

For Finnish researchers, CSC computing services provide free of charge supercomputing and cloud resources. Supercomputer Puhti provides a wide selection of [EO tools](https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/1522/files#what-applications-are-available-on-puhti). A few Finnish EO datasets are provided on the supercomputer Puhti and in object storage Allas.
```

> For Finnish researchers, CSC computing services provide free of charge supercomputing and cloud resources. Supercomputer Puhti provides a wide selection of EO tools, see below. A few Finnish EO datasets are provided on the supercomputer Puhti and in object storage Allas.

Author: ```suggestion
For Finnish researchers, CSC computing services provide free of charge supercomputing and cloud resources. Supercomputer Puhti provides a wide selection of EO tools, see below. A few Finnish EO datasets are provided on the supercomputer Puhti and in object storage Allas.

```

* Puhti
    * [List of all available datasets in Puhti](../../../data/datasets/spatial-data-in-csc-computing-env.md)
    * Sentinel and Landsat mosaics of Finland provided by FMI and SYKE: ```/appl/data/geo/sentinel/s2```
    * Accessing data in Puhti requires CSC user account with a project where Puhti service is enabled. All Puhti users have **read** access to data stored on Puhti, no need to move it, unless you need to modify it.
* Allas
    * [List of all available geospatial datasets in Allas](../../../data/datasets/spatial-data-in-csc-computing-env.md#spatial-data-in-allas)
    * Sentinel-2 L2A data of Finland, where crops are grown, during growing seasons of 2016-present, [usage instructions](https://a3s.fi/sentinel-readme/README.txt)
    * [Data from Allas can be read directly with different tools](../../../apps/gdal.md#using-files-directly-from-allas).
        
    

> **[Amazon Web Service (AWS) open EO data](https://registry.opendata.aws/?search=tags:gis,earth%20observation,events,mapping,meteorological,environmental,transportation)** provides many different worldwide datasets, including Landsat and Sentinel. Some of the data can be downloaded on "requestor pays" basis. The situation is changing all the time, currently [Sentinel-2 L2A Cloud-optimized Geotiffs](https://registry.opendata.aws/sentinel-2-l2a-cogs/) are available for free. AWS also offers the possibility for virtual machines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**[Amazon Web Service (AWS) open EO data](https://registry.opendata.aws/?search=tags:gis,earth%20observation,events,mapping,meteorological,environmental,transportation)** provides many different worldwide datasets, including Landsat and Sentinel. Some of the data can be downloaded on "requestor pays" basis. The situation is changing all the time, currently [Sentinel-2 L2A Cloud-optimized Geotiffs](https://registry.opendata.aws/sentinel-2-l2a-cogs/) are available for free. AWS also offers the possibility for virtual machines, both CPU and GPU.
```

**[Data and Information Access Services (DIAS)](https://www.copernicus.eu/en/access-data/dias)** are paid processing platforms with direct data access. The services provide primarily Copernicus data.
    

> **[Microsoft planetary computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com)** is a processing platform with [data access](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/catalog). It is currently available in preview, [request access](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/account/request).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**[Microsoft planetary computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com)** provides [worldwide EO data](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/catalog). For [computing](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/docs/concepts/computing/) it offers JupyterHub together with Dask Gateway, both CPUs and GPUs are avaialable. It is currently available in preview, [request access](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/account/request).
```

> **[Google Earth Engine](https://earthengine.google.com/)** is a processing platform, which requires [registration](https://signup.earthengine.google.com/). It can be accessed via browser and has worldwide analysis ready data available of, among others [Sentinel-2](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/sentinel-2/) and [Sentinel-1](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/COPERNICUS_S1_GRD). In general JavaScript is used to use the platform, but also [Python](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/guides/python_install) and [R](https://github.com/r-spatial/rgee) support exists. Check out [CSC's GEE course materials](https://www.csc.fi/fi/web/training/-/introduction-to-using-google-earth-engine) and [GEE's own tutorials](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/tutorials). Note that Google Cloud Storage might be needed to export large datasets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**[Google Earth Engine](https://earthengine.google.com/)** is a processing platform, which requires [registration](https://signup.earthengine.google.com/). It can be accessed via browser and has worldwide analysis ready data available of, among others [Sentinel-2](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/sentinel-2/) and [Sentinel-1](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/COPERNICUS_S1_GRD). In general JavaScript is used to use the platform, but also [Python](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/guides/python_install) and [R](https://github.com/r-spatial/rgee) support exists. Check out [GEE's tutorials](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/tutorials). Note that Google Cloud Storage might be needed to export large datasets.
```

> **[Google Earth Engine](https://earthengine.google.com/)** is a processing platform, which requires [registration](https://signup.earthengine.google.com/). It can be accessed via browser and has worldwide analysis ready data available of, among others [Sentinel-2](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/sentinel-2/) and [Sentinel-1](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/COPERNICUS_S1_GRD). In general JavaScript is used to use the platform, but also [Python](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/guides/python_install) and [R](https://github.com/r-spatial/rgee) support exists. Check out [CSC's GEE course materials](https://www.csc.fi/fi/web/training/-/introduction-to-using-google-earth-engine) and [GEE's own tutorials](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/tutorials). Note that Google Cloud Storage might be needed to export large datasets.

Reviewer 2: CSC GEE materials are so old and they are mostly based on public tutorials anway and there is nothing CSC-specific in them. So I would skip it here.

> Other services that provide raw and/or preprocessed data for download only: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### EO data download services 
```

> [**European Space Agency's SciHub**](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/home) provides worldwide Sentinel 2 L1C and L2A and Sentinel 1 SLC, GRD , RAW and OCN products. It requires free [registration](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/self-registration) and many of the data is in "Long term archive" and cannot be downloaded directly, but needs to be requested.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[**European Space Agency's SciHub**](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/home) provides worldwide Sentinel 2 L1C and L2A and Sentinel 1 SLC, GRD , RAW and OCN products. It requires free [registration](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/self-registration) and many of the data is in "Long term archive" and cannot be downloaded directly, but needs to be requested. Downloading is limited to 2 concurrent processes, so downloading bigger amounts of data is likely slow.
```

> [**FinHub**](https://finhub.nsdc.fmi.fi/#/home) is the Finnish national mirror of SciHub; others national mirrors also exist. It covers Finland and the Baltics and offers Sentinel 2 L1C and Sentinel 1 SLC, GRD and OCN products and requires own registration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[**FinHub**](https://finhub.nsdc.fmi.fi/#/home) is the Finnish national mirror of SciHub; others national mirrors also exist. It covers Finland and the Baltics and offers Sentinel 2 L1C (but not L2A) and Sentinel 1 SLC, GRD and OCN products and requires own registration. Finhub does not have download limitations like Scihub. It is located in Finland, so downloading data from there in Finland is relatively fast.
```

# Earth Observation guide

This guide aims to help users to work with Earth Observation (EO) data using CSC's computing resources. The purpose of this guide is to help you find the right data and tools for your raster data based EO tasks. If you are interested in the fundamentals of EO, please check the resources at the bottom of the page.

**What are the benefits of using EO data**

* Possibility to observe wide area at same time
* Non-intrusive
* Same sensor for different parts of the world
* Time series 

!!! default "Raster data format"

> Most EO data is available in [raster format]( 
> https://towardsdatascience.com/the-ultimate-beginners-guide-to-geospatial-raster-data-feb7673f6db0). The most common file formats are [GeoTiff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoTIFF) and [GeoJPEG2000](http://giswiki.org/wiki/GeoJPEG2000).

Author: ```suggestion
Most EO data is available in <a href="https://towardsdatascience.com/the-ultimate-beginners-guide-to-geospatial-raster-data-feb7673f6db0" aria-label="Towards data science guide to raster data">raster format</a>. The most common file formats are <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoTIFF" aria-label="GeoTiff data format">GeoTiff</a> and <a href="http://giswiki.org/wiki/GeoJPEG2000" aria-label="GeoJPEG2000 data format">GeoJPEG2000</a>.
```

    * Optical data is more easily interpreted and processed (and more pre-processed data is available)

!!! default "EO database"

    Database of all current and future EO missions and instrument information can be found in the [CEOS EO handbook database](http://database.eohandbook.com/database/instrumenttable.aspx)

## Where can I find the data?

For working with EO data there are two main options:
* Use a service which has EO data readily available and offers data processing and analysis capabilities. Usually these give better user experience and efficiency, but the services might be limited in computing power, available tools or options for adding own data. The commercial systems also might have costs.
* Use your own processing environment (PC, cloud or HPC) and download the data to this system. This requires extra effort for downloading and managing the data, but in other ways might give more freedom.

!!! default "Other geospatial datasets"

    To find other geospatial datasets, check out [CSC open spatial dataset list](https://research.csc.fi/open-gis-data).

### Services providing EO data and processing capabilities

**CSC services**

> For Finnish researchers, CSC computing services provide free of charge supercomputing and cloud resources. Supercomputer Puhti provides a wide selection of [EO tools](https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/pull/1522/files#what-applications-are-available-on-puhti). A few Finnish EO datasets are provided on the supercomputer Puhti and in object storage Allas.

Author: ```suggestion
For Finnish researchers, CSC computing services provide free of charge supercomputing and cloud resources. Supercomputer Puhti provides a wide selection of EO tools, see below. A few Finnish EO datasets are provided on the supercomputer Puhti and in object storage Allas.
```

* Puhti
    * [List of all available datasets in Puhti](../../../data/datasets/spatial-data-in-csc-computing-env.md)
    * Sentinel and Landsat mosaics of Finland provided by FMI and SYKE: ```/appl/data/geo/sentinel/s2```
    * Accessing data in Puhti requires CSC user account with a project where Puhti service is enabled. All Puhti users have **read** access to data stored on Puhti, no need to move it, unless you need to modify it.
* Allas
    * [List of all available geospatial datasets in Allas](../../../data/datasets/spatial-data-in-csc-computing-env.md#spatial-data-in-allas)

>     * Sentinel-2 L2A data of Finland, where crops are grown, during growing seasons of 2016-present, [usage instructions](https://a3s.fi/sentinel-readme/README.txt)

Author: ```suggestion
    * Sentinel-2 L2A data of Finland, where crops are grown, during growing seasons of 2016-present; <a href="https://a3s.fi/sentinel-readme/README.txt" aria-label="Sentinel-2 data on Allas usage instructions">usage instructions</a>
```

    * [Data from Allas can be read directly with different tools](../../../apps/gdal.md#using-files-directly-from-allas).
        
    
**[Amazon Web Service (AWS) open EO data](https://registry.opendata.aws/?search=tags:gis,earth%20observation,events,mapping,meteorological,environmental,transportation)** provides many different worldwide datasets, including Landsat and Sentinel. Some of the data can be downloaded on "requestor pays" basis. The situation is changing all the time, currently [Sentinel-2 L2A Cloud-optimized Geotiffs](https://registry.opendata.aws/sentinel-2-l2a-cogs/) are available for free. AWS also offers the possibility for virtual machines, with both CPU and GPU.

**[Data and Information Access Services (DIAS)](https://www.copernicus.eu/en/access-data/dias)** are paid processing platforms with direct data access. The services provide primarily Copernicus data.
    

> **[Microsoft planetary computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com)** provides [worldwide EO data](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/catalog). For [computing](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/docs/concepts/computing/) it offers JupyterHub together with Dask Gateway, both CPUs and GPUs are avaialable. It is currently available in preview: [request access to the planetary computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/account/request).

Author: ```suggestion
**[Microsoft planetary computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com)** provides worldwide EO data. For computing it offers JupyterHub together with Dask Gateway; both CPUs and GPUs are available. It is currently available in preview: [request access to the planetary computer](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/account/request).
```

> **[Google Earth Engine](https://earthengine.google.com/)** is a processing platform, which requires [registration](https://signup.earthengine.google.com/). It can be accessed via browser and has worldwide analysis ready data available of, among others [Sentinel-2](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/sentinel-2/) and [Sentinel-1](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/COPERNICUS_S1_GRD). In general JavaScript is used to use the platform, but also [Python](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/guides/python_install) and [R](https://github.com/r-spatial/rgee) support exists. Check out [GEE's tutorials](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/tutorials). Note that Google Cloud Storage might be needed to export large datasets.

Author: ```suggestion
**[Google Earth Engine](https://earthengine.google.com/)** is a processing platform, which requires registration. It can be accessed via browser and has worldwide analysis ready data available of, among others <a href="https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/sentinel-2/" aria-label="Sentinel-2 data on GEE">Sentinel-2</a> and <a href="https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/COPERNICUS_S1_GRD" aria-label="Sentinel-1 data on GEE">Sentinel-1 data</a> . In general, JavaScript is used on the platform, but also  <a href="https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/guides/python_install" aria-label="Python on GEE">Python</a>  and  <a href="https://github.com/r-spatial/rgee" aria-label="R on GEE">R</a> [GEE R]() support exists. Check out [GEE's tutorials](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/tutorials). Note that Google Cloud Storage might be needed to export large datasets.
```

### EO data download services 

> [**European Space Agency's SciHub**](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/home) provides worldwide Sentinel 2 L1C and L2A and Sentinel 1 SLC, GRD , RAW and OCN products. It requires free [registration](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/self-registration) and many of the data is in "Long term archive" and cannot be downloaded directly, but needs to be requested. Download is limited to 2 concurrent processes per user.

Author: ```suggestion
[**European Space Agency's SciHub**](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/home) provides worldwide Sentinel 2 L1C and L2A and Sentinel 1 SLC, GRD , RAW and OCN products. It requires free [SciHub registration](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/self-registration) and many of the data is in "Long term archive" and cannot be downloaded directly, but needs to be requested. Download is limited to 2 concurrent processes per user.
```

[**FinHub**](https://finhub.nsdc.fmi.fi/#/home) is the Finnish national mirror of SciHub; others national mirrors also exist. It covers Finland and the Baltics and offers Sentinel 2 L1C (but not L2A) and Sentinel 1 SLC, GRD and OCN products and requires own registration. Finhub does not have concurrent download limitations.

!!! default  ""  

>     **Both of the above** provide a similar Graphical User Interface (GUI) and Application Programming Interface (API) to access the data. Other tools for downloading the data from open access hubs: [sentinelsat](https://sentinelsat.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) with [examples for SciHub and FinHub](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/blob/master/python/sentinel/sentinelsat_download_from_finhub_and_scihub.py), ...

Author: ```suggestion
    **Both of the above** provide a similar Graphical User Interface (GUI) and Application Programming Interface (API) to access the data. Other tools for downloading the data from open access hubs include [sentinelsat](https://sentinelsat.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) with [CSC examples for SciHub and FinHub data download](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/blob/master/python/sentinel/sentinelsat_download_from_finhub_and_scihub.py) and [FORCE](../../../apps/force.md).
```

> [**USGS EarthExplorer**](https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/) provides lots of different US related datasets, also worldwide Landsat mission datasets. It requires free [registration](https://ers.cr.usgs.gov/register). Data can be browsed and downloaded via GUI in web interface and bulk download.

Author: ```suggestion
[**USGS EarthExplorer**](https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/) provides lots of different US related datasets, also worldwide Landsat mission datasets. It requires free [EarthExplorer registration](https://ers.cr.usgs.gov/register). Data can be browsed and downloaded via GUI in web interface and bulk download.
```

> [**NASA Earthdata**](https://search.earthdata.nasa.gov) provides among many others harmonized Landsat 8 and Sentinel-2 dataset. It requires [registration](https://urs.earthdata.nasa.gov/users/new) and download is possible via Graphical web interface and bulk download.

Author: ```suggestion
[**NASA Earthdata**](https://search.earthdata.nasa.gov) provides among many others harmonized Landsat 8 and Sentinel-2 dataset. It requires [NASA EarthData registration](https://urs.earthdata.nasa.gov/users/new) and download is possible via Graphical web interface and bulk download.
```

> **Finnish Sentinel image mosaics** are provided by  [SYKE](https://www.syke.fi/en-US) and [FMI](https://en.ilmatieteenlaitos.fi/) and partly available in Puhti: `/appl/data/geo/sentinel`. Among others, [Sentinel-2 image index mosaics](https://ckan.ymparisto.fi/dataset/sentinel-2-image-index-mosaics-s2ind-sentinel-2-kuvamosaiikit-s2ind)  and [Sentinel-1 SAR-image mosaics](https://ckan.ymparisto.fi/dataset/sentinel-1-sar-image-mosaic-s1sar-sentinel-1-sar-kuvamosaiikki-s1sar) are available.

Author: ```suggestion
**Finnish Sentinel image mosaics** are provided by the [Finnish environment institute, SYKE](https://www.syke.fi/en-US) and the [Finnish Meteorological Institute, FMI](https://en.ilmatieteenlaitos.fi/) and partly available in Puhti: `/appl/data/geo/sentinel`. Among others, [Sentinel-2 image index mosaics](https://ckan.ymparisto.fi/dataset/sentinel-2-image-index-mosaics-s2ind-sentinel-2-kuvamosaiikit-s2ind)  and [Sentinel-1 SAR-image mosaics](https://ckan.ymparisto.fi/dataset/sentinel-1-sar-image-mosaic-s1sar-sentinel-1-sar-kuvamosaiikki-s1sar) are available.
```

> [**Google Cloud Storage**](https://cloud.google.com) provides [Sentinel 2: L1C](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/public-datasets/sentinel-2)

Author: ```suggestion
[**Google Cloud Storage**](https://cloud.google.com) provides <a href="https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/public-datasets/sentinel-2" aria-label="Sentinel-2 data on Google cloud storage">Sentinel 2: L1C</a> 
```

>  and [Landsat: Collection 1](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/public-datasets/landsat). Data can be downloaded from here for example with [FORCE](../../../apps/force.md).

Author: ```suggestion
 and <a href="https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/public-datasets/landsat" aria-label="Landsat: Collection 1 data on Google cloud storage">Landsat: Collection 1</a>. Data can be downloaded from here for example with [FORCE](../../../apps/force.md).
```

[**Terramonitor**](https://www.terramonitor.com/services/analysis-ready) provides pre-prosessed, analysis ready Sentinel-2 data from Finland available between 2018-2020.[Contact Terramonitor about pricing](https://www.terramonitor.com/services/analysis-ready#contact)

> [**Sentinelhub**](https://www.sentinel-hub.com/explore/) provides among others worldwide [Sentinel-2](https://collections.sentinel-hub.com/sentinel-2-l2a/) and [Sentinel-1](https://collections.sentinel-hub.com/sentinel-1-grd/) data. Requires [subscription](https://www.sentinel-hub.com/pricing/).

Author: ```suggestion
[**Sentinelhub**](https://www.sentinel-hub.com/explore/) provides among others worldwide <a href="https://collections.sentinel-hub.com/sentinel-2-l2a/" aria-label="Sentinel 2 on sentinelhub">Sentinel 2</a> and <a href="https://collections.sentinel-hub.com/sentinel-1-grd/" aria-label="Sentinel 1 on sentinelhub">Sentinel 1</a> data. Requires [sentinelhub subscription](https://www.sentinel-hub.com/pricing/).
```

!!! default "STAC"

    Many data providers and companies also provide a Spatio Temporal Asset Catalog (STAC) of their and other datasets. These catalogues help in finding available data based on time and location with the possibility for multiple additional filters, such as cloud cover and resolution. The [STAC Index](https://www.stacindex.org/) provides a nice overview of available catalogues from all over the world. The STAC Index page also includes many resources for learning and utilizing STAC. Check out also CSC's [examples for utilizing STAC from Python](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/blob/master/python/STAC).

## Where can I store the data?

What to consider when chosing a storage location:

* Raw vs intermediate vs final result data
    * What needs to be stored?
    * Storage space?
* Accessibility
    * Sensitive data?
    * Who needs to have access?
    * How needs the data to be accessed?
    * Intended usage?
* Maintenance needs?
* Metadata needs?

> In general, data can be stored on the [supercomputer disk](../../../computing/disk.md) or in the object storage Allas ([Allas overview](https://research.csc.fi/-/allas), [Allas guide](../../../data/Allas/index.md)). On the supercomputer, data can be stored on ```/scratch/project_xxx``` with xxx being your project number. Smaller amounts can also be stored short term on the computing nodes ```$LOCAL_SCRATCH``` during processing. In Allas, data is stored in so-called buckets, and can be accessed or transferred as part of the computing job, see also CSC's webinar on [Allas for spatial data](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mnFXe2-dJ_g).

Author: ```suggestion
In general, data can be stored on the [supercomputer disk](../../../computing/disk.md) or in the object storage Allas ([CSC Allas overview](https://research.csc.fi/-/allas), [CSC Allas guide](../../../data/Allas/index.md)). On the supercomputer, data can be stored on ```/scratch/project_xxx``` with xxx being your project number. Smaller amounts can also be stored short term on the computing nodes ```$LOCAL_SCRATCH``` during processing. In Allas, data is stored in so-called buckets, and can be accessed or transferred as part of the computing job, see also [CSC's webinar on Allas for spatial data](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mnFXe2-dJ_g).
```

!!! default "Longer term storage solutions at CSC"

>     For longer term storage and publication, CSC offers a range of other services. See also CSC's general [guide on stroing data](../../../data/datasets/hosting-datasets-at-CSC.md) and CSC's [guide on how to choose a suitable storage solution](../../../data/datasets/hosting-datasets-at-CSC.md).

Author: ```suggestion
    For longer term storage and publication, CSC offers a range of other services. See also [CSC's general guide on stroing data](../../../data/datasets/hosting-datasets-at-CSC.md) and [CSC's guide on how to choose a suitable storage solution](../../../data/datasets/hosting-datasets-at-CSC.md).
```

## How can I process the data?

> At CSC, EO data can be processed and analyzed using for example [supercomputer Puhti](../../../computing/systems-puhti.md) or a virtual machine in the CSC cloud, [cPouta](../../../cloud/pouta/pouta-what-is.md). You can find more information around geocomputing using CSC resources on our [Geocomputing pages](https://research.csc.fi/geocomputing).

Author: ```suggestion
At CSC, EO data can be processed and analyzed using for example [CSC's supercomputer Puhti](../../../computing/systems-puhti.md) or a virtual machine in the [CSC cloud service cPouta](../../../cloud/pouta/pouta-what-is.md). You can find more information around geocomputing using CSC resources on our [Geocomputing pages](https://research.csc.fi/geocomputing).
```

> At CSC, EO data can be processed and analyzed using for example [CSC's supercomputer Puhti](../../../computing/systems-puhti.md) or a virtual machine in the [CSC cloud service cPouta](../../../cloud/pouta/pouta-what-is.md). You can find more information around geocomputing using CSC resources on our [Geocomputing pages](https://research.csc.fi/geocomputing).

Author: ```suggestion
At CSC, EO data can be processed and analyzed using for example [CSC's supercomputer Puhti](../../../computing/systems-puhti.md) or a virtual machine in the [CSC cloud service cPouta](../../../cloud/pouta/pouta-what-is.md). You can find more information around geocomputing using CSC resources on our [CSC geocomputing pages](https://research.csc.fi/geocomputing).
```

> Puhti has a lot of applications already installed (see below), you do not need to worry about it. If you need further applications, you can ask us to install them for you. You can also add your own installations using for example the [Tykky tool](../../../computing/containers/tykky.md).   In cPouta, you need to set up your own virtual machine including all security and software setup, see [our cPouta instructions](../../../cloud/pouta/launch-vm-from-web-gui.md).

Author: ```suggestion
Puhti has a lot of applications already installed (see below), you do not need to worry about it. If you need further applications, you can ask us to install them for you. You can also add your own installations using for example the [CSC Tykky tool](../../../computing/containers/tykky.md).   In cPouta, you need to set up your own virtual machine including all security and software setup, see [CSC cPouta instructions](../../../cloud/pouta/launch-vm-from-web-gui.md).
```

!!! default "Please note"

    Puhti (and also CSC's other supercomputers Mahti and LUMI), work differently from your own computer. Before starting to use them, please familiarize yourself with the environment by for example visit the respective chapters in our [CSC computing environment self-learning course](https://ssl.eventilla.com/csccompenvselflearn).

What to consider when chosing software:

* User skills and preferences
    * Graphical User Interface (GUI)
    * Command Line Interface (CLI)
    * Scripting
* User needs
    * Batch processing
    * Automation
    * Reproducibility
* Open source vs commercial
    * This guide focusses on [software available on CSC supercomputer Puhti](../../../apps/index.md) 

### What applications are available on Puhti?

To Puhti, only Linux based software can be installed. Most of the installed geospatial tools are open source.

> GUIs of software available on Puhti can be accessed as an interactive job via the [Puhti web interface](https://puhti.csc.fi) or [X11 connection](../../../computing/connecting.md). These graphical interfaces are mainly for visualization and testing purposes, the actual efficient processing should be done within batch jobs.

Author: ```suggestion
GUIs of software available on Puhti can be accessed as an interactive job via the [Puhti web interface](https://puhti.csc.fi) or [X11 connection to the CSC computing resources](../../../computing/connecting.md). These graphical interfaces are mainly for visualization and testing purposes, the actual efficient processing should be done within batch jobs.
```

* [JuliaGeo](https://github.com/JuliaGeo) provides an overview of packages for geospatial data.

[**Matlab**](../../../apps/matlab.md)

* You can run Matlab jobs on Puhti conveniently from your own computers Matlab installation.

[**Orfeo Toolbox (OTB)**](../../../apps/otb.md)

* Offers a wide variety of applications from ortho-rectification or pansharpening, all the way to classification, SAR processing, and much more.
* Orfeo Toolbox is available as CLI, GUI and via Python interface.

[**Python**](../../../apps/python.md)

* The [geoconda module](../../../apps/geoconda.md) provides many useful Python packages for raster data processing and analysis:

    * py6s: Python interface to the Second Simulation of the Satellite Signal in the Solar Spectrum (6S) atmospheric Radiative Transfer Model.
    * rasterio: access to geospatial raster data.
    * rasterstats: summarizing geospatial raster datasets based on vector geometries.
    * sentinelsat: downloading Sentinel images
    * scimage: algorithms for image processing.
    * stackstac: STAC data to xarray
    * xarray: working with multidimensional raster data.

> * [Geospatial Python examples for Puhti](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/tree/master/python). See also raster lesson of CSC version of GeoPython [course material](https://github.com/csc-training/notebooks) for further examples.

Author: ```suggestion
* [Geospatial Python examples for Puhti](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/tree/master/python). See also raster lesson of [CSC version of GeoPython course material](https://github.com/csc-training/notebooks) for further examples.
```

[**QGIS**](../../../apps/qgis.md)

* General Geographic Information System (GIS) with limited multispectral image processing capabilities
* GUI with batch processing possibility and Python interface

> * Used for example for [visualization](https://www.qgistutorials.com/en/docs/making_a_map.html) and [map algebra and other raster processing](https://docs.qgis.org/3.22/en/docs/user_manual/processing_algs/qgis/rasteranalysis.html)

Author: ```suggestion
* Used for example for visualization, map algebra and other raster processing
```

> * Many plug-ins available, for EO data processing, check out the [Semi-automatic classification plugin](https://fromgistors.blogspot.com/p/semi-automatic-classification-plugin.html).

Author: ```suggestion
* Many plug-ins available, for EO data processing, check out the [QGIS Semi-automatic classification plugin](https://fromgistors.blogspot.com/p/semi-automatic-classification-plugin.html).
```

### Machine Learning with EO data

One example of the advanced usage of EO data is for machine learning. If you are interested in the topic, you can find a lot of examples using EO and other geospatial data for machine learning in our [Machine learning with spatial data course exercises]( https://github.com/csc-training/GeoML) on Github. 
 
## Where can I get help?

If you are interested in using CSC services for your EO research, please make yourself familiar with the services:

* Visit a course, seminar or workshop; you can find all upcoming and past events in [the CSC training calendar](https://www.csc.fi/en/training#training-calendar)
    * For getting familiar and started with CSCs environment, check out the [self learning CSC computing environment material](https://ssl.eventilla.com/csccompenvselflearn)
* Find information about services and how to use them in [CSC's documentation pages](../../../index.md)
* For information on geocomputing in CSC environment, checkout the collection of CSC's [geocomputing learning materials](https://research.csc.fi/gis-learning-materials) and [geocomputing examples on github](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing)

> You can find all the ways that you can get help from CSC specialists via our [contact page](../../contact.md).

Author: ```suggestion
You can find all the ways that you can get help from CSC specialists via [CSC contact page](../../contact.md).
```

We are happy to help with technical problems around our services and are open for suggestions on which Software should be installed to Puhti, or what kind of courses should be offered or materials/examples should be prepared. 

## Acknowledgement

> This guide was developed in cooperation with the Finnish Environment Institute [SYKE](https://www.syke.fi/), as part of the [Geoportti](https://www.geoportti.fi/) project.

Author: ```suggestion
This guide was developed in cooperation with the [Finnish Environment Institute, SYKE](https://www.syke.fi/), as part of the [Geoportti project](https://www.geoportti.fi/).
```

[**USGS EarthExplorer**](https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/) provides lots of different US related datasets, also worldwide Landsat mission datasets. It requires free [EarthExplorer registration](https://ers.cr.usgs.gov/register). Data can be browsed and downloaded via GUI in web interface and bulk download.
    
[**NASA Earthdata**](https://search.earthdata.nasa.gov) provides among many others harmonized Landsat 8 and Sentinel-2 dataset. It requires [NASA EarthData registration](https://urs.earthdata.nasa.gov/users/new) and download is possible via Graphical web interface and bulk download.

**Finnish Sentinel image mosaics** are provided by the [Finnish Environment Institute, SYKE](https://www.syke.fi/en-US) and the [Finnish Meteorological Institute, FMI](https://en.ilmatieteenlaitos.fi/) and partly available in Puhti: `/appl/data/geo/sentinel`. Among others, [Sentinel-2 image index mosaics](https://ckan.ymparisto.fi/dataset/sentinel-2-image-index-mosaics-s2ind-sentinel-2-kuvamosaiikit-s2ind)  and [Sentinel-1 SAR-image mosaics](https://ckan.ymparisto.fi/dataset/sentinel-1-sar-image-mosaic-s1sar-sentinel-1-sar-kuvamosaiikki-s1sar) are available.

> [**Google Cloud Storage**](https://cloud.google.com) provides <a href="https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/public-datasets/sentinel-2" aria-label="Sentinel-2 data on Google cloud storage">Sentinel 2: L1C</a> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[**Google Cloud**](https://cloud.google.com) provides some [public EO datasets in Google Cloud Storage](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/public-datasets), inlcuding Sentinel-2 L1C and Landsat Collection 1 data. Google Cloud also offers the possibility for virtual machines, with both CPU and GPU.
```

Reviewer 2: I think that Google should also be in same category as AWS, one can get VMs also there.

 and <a href="https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/public-datasets/landsat" aria-label="Landsat: Collection 1 data on Google cloud storage">Landsat: Collection 1</a>. Data can be downloaded from here for example with [FORCE](../../../apps/force.md).

[**Terramonitor**](https://www.terramonitor.com/services/analysis-ready) provides pre-prosessed, analysis ready Sentinel-2 data from Finland available between 2018-2020.[Contact Terramonitor about pricing](https://www.terramonitor.com/services/analysis-ready#contact)

> [**Sentinelhub**](https://www.sentinel-hub.com/explore/) provides among others worldwide <a href="https://collections.sentinel-hub.com/sentinel-2-l2a/" aria-label="Sentinel 2 on sentinelhub">Sentinel 2</a> and <a href="https://collections.sentinel-hub.com/sentinel-1-grd/" aria-label="Sentinel 1 on sentinelhub">Sentinel 1</a> data. Requires [sentinelhub subscription](https://www.sentinel-hub.com/pricing/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[**Sentinelhub**](https://www.sentinel-hub.com/explore/) provides several EO products, including Sentinels, Landsat and MODIS. It offers also processing services. Requires [sentinelhub subscription](https://www.sentinel-hub.com/pricing/).
```

Reviewer 2: Should also moved to the other category.

!!! default "STAC"

    Many data providers and companies also provide a Spatio Temporal Asset Catalog (STAC) of their and other datasets. These catalogues help in finding available data based on time and location with the possibility for multiple additional filters, such as cloud cover and resolution. The [STAC Index](https://www.stacindex.org/) provides a nice overview of available catalogues from all over the world. The STAC Index page also includes many resources for learning and utilizing STAC. Check out also CSC's [examples for utilizing STAC from Python](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/blob/master/python/STAC).

> ## Where can I store the data?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Where can I store the data at CSC?
```

> ## Where can I store the data?

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it would be better for example here put a heading a la "Working with EO data at CSC" The rest at practical level about CSC other than the what to consider..

What to consider when chosing a storage location:

* Raw vs intermediate vs final result data
    * What needs to be stored?
    * Storage space?
* Accessibility
    * Sensitive data?
    * Who needs to have access?
    * How needs the data to be accessed?
    * Intended usage?
* Maintenance needs?
* Metadata needs?

> In general, data can be stored on the [supercomputer disk](../../../computing/disk.md) or in the object storage Allas ([CSC Allas overview](https://research.csc.fi/-/allas), [CSC Allas guide](../../../data/Allas/index.md)). On the supercomputer, data can be stored on ```/scratch/project_xxx``` with xxx being your project number. Smaller amounts can also be stored short term on the computing nodes ```$LOCAL_SCRATCH``` during processing. In Allas, data is stored in so-called buckets, and can be accessed or transferred as part of the computing job, see also [CSC's webinar on Allas for spatial data](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mnFXe2-dJ_g).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Storage in CSC computing environment

* [Local storage in HPC:](../../../computing/disk.md) 
	* The default data storage is in ```/scratch/project_xxx``` with xxx being your project number. 
	* Smaller amounts can also be stored short term on the computing nodes ```$LOCAL_SCRATCH``` during processing. 

* (Object storage Allas)[CSC Allas guide](../../../data/Allas/index.md)). Data is stored in buckets, and can be accessed or transferred as part of the computing job. Allas can be accessed from all o See also [CSC's webinar on Allas for spatial data](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mnFXe2-dJ_g).
```

Reviewer 2: Hmm,  I wonder if we at some point should call say that now it is only about CSC services? Now the HPC disk details come rather suddenly without even intro to HPC..

* Time series 

## Most EO data = Raster data

* One file per band or multiband files
* Grid of pixel values
* Example of continuous data
* Georeference: coordinate for the top left pixel , the size of each pixel in the X direction, the size of each pixel in the Y direction, and the amount (if any) by which the product is rotated.

## Using EO data in your research

### What data do I need?

Consider:

* Sensor
    * Optical
        * [Landsat](https://landsat.gsfc.nasa.gov/)
        * [MODIS](https://modis.gsfc.nasa.gov/)
        * [Copernicus Sentinel-2](https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-2)
        * [Pleiades](https://pleiades.cnes.fr/en/PLEIADES/index.htm)
        * [Spot](https://www.intelligence-airbusds.com/imagery/constellation/spot/)
        * [Planet](https://www.planet.com/products/planet-imagery/)
        * [WorldView](http://worldview3.digitalglobe.com/)
        * [Proba-V](https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/catalog/proba-v-1km-333m-and-100m-products)
        * ...
    * RADAR (Radio Detection and Ranging) -> SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar)
        * [Copernicus Sentinel 1](https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-1)

>         * [Radarsat](https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/eng/satellites/radarsat/default.asp)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        * [Radarsat](https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/eng/satellites/radarsat/)
```

        * [TanDEM-X](https://www.dlr.de/content/en/missions/tandem-x.html)
        * [TerraSAR-X](https://www.dlr.de/content/en/missions/terrasar-x.html)
        * [ICEYE](https://www.iceye.com/)
        * ...
    * LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging)
        * [ICESat](https://icesat-2.gsfc.nasa.gov/)
        * [GEDI](https://gedi.umd.edu/)
        * ...
    * Database of all current and future EO missions can be found in the [CEOS EO handbook database](http://database.eohandbook.com/database/missiontable.aspx)
* Resolution
    * Temporal: when and how often a certain area is visited
    * Spatial: the area on the ground that each pixel covers
    * Spectral: the area of the electromagnetic spectrum that is observed and spectral width of each band provided
    * Radiometric: how many values are possible for each pixel (bit-depth)
* Costs
    * Free: e.g. Landsat, MODIS, Sentinel, ...
    * Non free (but might be possible to get for free/less for research): e.g. WorldView, Spot, Planet, ...
* Preprocessing needs
    * Raw or pre-processed 
* User experience and knowledge
    * RADAR/LiDAR require solid background knowledge for processing and interpretation

>     * Optical  data is more easily interpreted and processed (and more pre-processed data is available)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * Optical data is more easily interpreted and processed (and more pre-processed data is available)
```

### Where do I find the data?

> The best place to get the data from depends on your needs: Do you want to download the data into your own processing environment or do you need a processing environment close to the data? The answer depends on what you want to do with the data and where it is located.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The best place to get the data depends on your needs: Do you want to download the data into your own processing environment or do you need a processing environment close to the data? The answer depends on what you want to do with the data and where it is located.
```

Below is a (uncomplete) set of services, that provide download or download and processing (marked with *) capabilities:

See also a list of other places on [CSC research pages](https://research.csc.fi/open-gis-data#intdata3).

=== "CSC * "

    * Puhti
        * [List of all available datasets in Puhti](../../../data/datasets/spatial-data-in-csc-computing-env.md)
        * Sentinel and Landsat mosaics of Finland provided by FMI and SYKE: ```/appl/data/geo/sentinel/s2```
        * Every CSC user has **read** access to data stored on Puhti, no need to move it, unless you need to modify it
    * Allas
        * [List of all available geospatial datasets in Allas](../../../data/datasets/spatial-data-in-csc-computing-env.md)

>         * Sentinel-2 L2A data of crop growing Finland, growing seasons 2016-present, [usage instructions](https://a3s.fi/sentinel-readme/README.txt)

Author: Yea, this is a bit weird, but it actually is only those parts of Finland where crops are grown, and not crops growing in Finland. 
Maybe it could be `data of Finland where crops are grown` or `agriculturally active Finland` ? :D I don't know, they all sound weird.

>         * Sentinel-2 L2A data of crop growing Finland, growing seasons 2016-present, [usage instructions](https://a3s.fi/sentinel-readme/README.txt)

Reviewer 3: Oh, alright! Both of those options make more sense to me, but I don't know if it's just my general ignorance on the subject :D

        * Data can be directly read from Allas without download for some cases, see eg [GDAL docs](../../../apps/gdal.md) and [Allas Python examples](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/blob/master/python/allas/working_with_allas_from_Python_S3.py)
        
    
=== "Open Access Hubs"

    [SciHub](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/home)

>     * needs [registration](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/self-registration) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * Needs [registration](https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/self-registration) 
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

    * Sentinel 2 L1C and L2A products
    * Sentinel 1 SLC, GRD , RAW and OCN products
    * Worldwide
    * Note: most of the data is in "Long term archive" and cannot be downloaded directly, but needs to be requested

    [FinHub](https://finhub.nsdc.fmi.fi/#/home)

    * Needs [registration](https://nsdc.fmi.fi/services/service_finhub_registration)
    * Sentinel 2 L1C product
    * Sentinel 1 SLC, GRD and OCN products
    * Only Finland (and Baltics)

    [ASF](https://search.asf.alaska.edu/#/)
    
    * Needs [registration](https://urs.earthdata.nasa.gov/users/new?)

>     * Sentinel 1 SLC, GRD , RAW and OCN products

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * Sentinel 1 SLC, GRD, RAW and OCN products
```

    * Many SAR and SAR derived datasets from other sensors
    * Worldwide
    * Sentinel 1 data available for immediate download
    
    **All of the above** provide a similar Graphical User Interface (GUI) and Application Programming Interface (API) to access the data.
    Other tools for downloading the data from open access hubs: [sentinelsat](https://sentinelsat.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) with [examples for SciHub and FinHub](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/blob/master/python/sentinel/sentinelsat_download_from_finhub_and_scihub.py), ...

=== "USGS EarthExplorer"

    [Earthexplorer](https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/)

    * Needs [registration](https://ers.cr.usgs.gov/register)
    * Lots of different US related datasets 
    * Main: Landsat worldwide
    * GUI in web interface and bulk download

>     * Landsat download instructions: https://lta.cr.usgs.gov/sites/default/files/LS_C2_Help_122020.pdf

Reviewer 3: Link doesn't work / redirects to https://www.usgs.gov/centers/eros/science/usgs-eros-archive-products-overview

>     * Landsat download instructions: https://lta.cr.usgs.gov/sites/default/files/LS_C2_Help_122020.pdf

Author: ```suggestion
```

    
=== "NASA Earthdata"

    [Earthdata](https://search.earthdata.nasa.gov)
    
    * Needs [registration](https://urs.earthdata.nasa.gov/users/new)
    * Harmonized Landsat 8 and Sentinel-2 dataset and many more
    * Graphical web interface and bulk download

=== "Sentinel image mosaics"

    * Available in Puhti: /appl/data/geo/sentinel
    * Only Finland
    * [Sentinel-2 image index mosaics](https://ckan.ymparisto.fi/dataset/sentinel-2-image-index-mosaics-s2ind-sentinel-2-kuvamosaiikit-s2ind) 
    * [Sentinel-1 SAR-image mosaics](https://ckan.ymparisto.fi/dataset/sentinel-1-sar-image-mosaic-s1sar-sentinel-1-sar-kuvamosaiikki-s1sar)
    * [WMS (Geoserver)](https://data.nsdc.fmi.fi/geoserver/wms)

>     * [WCS (Geoserver)](https://data.nsdc.fmi.fi/geoserver/wcs)

Reviewer 3: Links not working, gives xml's of request errors?

>     * [WMS (Geoserver)](https://data.nsdc.fmi.fi/geoserver/wms)
>     * [WCS (Geoserver)](https://data.nsdc.fmi.fi/geoserver/wcs)

Author: ```suggestion
```

    * Provided by [SYKE](https://www.syke.fi/en-US) and [FMI](https://en.ilmatieteenlaitos.fi/)

=== "Google Cloud Storage"

    [Google Cloud Storage](https://cloud.google.com)

    * [Sentinel 2: L1C](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/public-datasets/sentinel-2)
    * [Landsat: Collection 1](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/public-datasets/landsat)
    * [FORCE](../../../apps/force.md) can download directly from here

=== "Amazon Web Service (AWS) *"

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

    * Worldwide
    * [Sentinel-2 bucket](https://registry.opendata.aws/sentinel-2/)
    * [Sentinel-1 bucket](https://registry.opendata.aws/sentinel-1/)
    * Requester pays the download costs
    * Managed by [Sinergise](http://www.sinergise.com/) 

=== "DIAS *" 

    * Data and Information Access Services
    * Multiple sites exits:
        * [ONDA](https://www.onda-dias.eu/cms/)

>         * [sobloo](https://sobloo.eu/)

Reviewer 3: Seems like they have shutdown the site? Send people to https://api.oneatlas.airbus.com/guides/extenso/g-extenso-about/ ?

>         * [sobloo](https://sobloo.eu/)

Author: ```suggestion
```

        * [CREODIAS](https://creodias.eu/)
        * [MUNDI](https://mundiwebservices.com/)
    * Costs
    * Processing platform with the data, no download needed
    * Data from DIAS objectstorage can easily be transferred to Allas (link to instructions here)
    
=== "Microsoft planetary computer *"

    * [Data](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/catalog) and processing platform ([Hub](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/compute))
    * Currently available in preview, [request access](https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/account/request)
  
=== "Terramonitor"

    [Terramonitor](https://www.terramonitor.com/services/analysis-ready)

    * Pre-prosessed, analysis ready Sentinel-2 data
    * Data from Finland available between 2018-2020

>     * [Pricing](https://store.terramonitor.com/category/analysis-ready?6f8e8f38_page=1) 

Reviewer 3: Link doesn't work

* On the supercomputer, data can be stored on ```/scratch/project_xxx``` with xxx being your project number
* Smaller amounts can also be stored short term on the computing nodes ```$LOCAL_SCRATCH``` during processing
* In Allas, data is stored in so-called buckets, and can be accessed or transferred as part of the computing job, see also CSC's webinar on [Allas for spatial data](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mnFXe2-dJ_g).

> For longer term storage and publication, CSC offers a range of other services. See also CSC's general [guide on stroing data](../../../data/datasets/hosting-datasets-at-CSC.md).

### How can I process the data?

At CSC, EO data can be processed and analyzed using for example supercomputer [Puhti](../../../computing/systems-puhti.md) or a virtual machine in the CSC cloud = [cPouta](../../../cloud/pouta/pouta-what-is.md). You can find more information around geocomputing using CSC resources on our [Geocomputing pages](https://research.csc.fi/geocomputing).

> Puhti has a lot of applications ready installed (see below), you do not need to worry about it. You can also add your own installations using for example the [Tykky tool](../../../computing/containers/tykky.md). In cPouta, you need to set up your own virtual machine including all security and software setup, see [instructions](../../../cloud/pouta/launch-vm-from-web-gui.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Puhti has a lot of applications already installed (see below), you do not need to worry about it. You can also add your own installations using for example the [Tykky tool](../../../computing/containers/tykky.md). In cPouta, you need to set up your own virtual machine including all security and software setup, see [instructions](../../../cloud/pouta/launch-vm-from-web-gui.md).
```

#### Software

What to consider:

* User skills and preferences
    * Graphical User Interface (GUI)
    * Command Line Interface (CLI)
    * Scripting
* User needs
    * Batch processing
    * Automation
    * Reproducibility
* Open source vs commercial
    * This guide focusses on [software available on CSC supercomputer Puhti](../../../apps/index.md) 

##### What applications are available on Puhti?

* Only Linux software
* Mostly open source

> GUIs of software available on Puhti can be accessed as an interactive job via the [Puhti web interface](https://puhti.csc.fi) or [X11 connection](../../../computing/connecting.md). These graphical interfaces are mainly for visualization and testing purposes, the actual efficient processing should be done within batch  jobs rather than interactive jobs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
GUIs of software available on Puhti can be accessed as an interactive job via the [Puhti web interface](https://puhti.csc.fi) or [X11 connection](../../../computing/connecting.md). These graphical interfaces are mainly for visualization and testing purposes, the actual efficient processing should be done within batch jobs rather than interactive jobs.
```
